---
layout: post
title:  "WHO IS THE REAL TARGET OF THE AGNI-P"
date:   "2021-07-29 12:00:00 +0530"
categories: defence
---

India has been at the peak of its awareness since 16 June, 2017 when India finally ordered China to stop encroaching on its borders and also occasionally peaking over the states of Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. Ever since then, there have been numerous attempts by the Chinese who are in cohorts with the Pakistanis and are up to no good. Pakistan has been that arrogant classmate that never seems to stop asking the teacher stupid questions and always ends up on the wrong side, rather I’d say the side reserved for the vaguely hubristic. But china is the behemoth in the region, with a rising India that challenges it’s hegemony. And we all know there cannot be two superpowers in the same world, more so for the same continent. Or else there is a fight to the death.

## India’s stand

The Indian establishment has always maintained the calm composure of Gandhian values of never being on the offensive, which have not so much but a considerable hit since the populist election of Narendra Modi and subsequently the appointment of General Bipin Rawat as the Chief of Armed Forces. Since 2008, when India overtook Pakistan in terms of GDP PPP per capita for the first time since independence, it has always been our motto not to compete with the inferior anymore. But rather look towards and compete against the next stage of arriving supremacy in Asia. But it has rather always been on the cards. Never in the action. This thesis becomes even more distilled with the inception of the new Agni P missile in early 2021.

Gone are the days when headlines like [“پاکستان نعین بحارت کے نئے وزیر اعظم اٹل بہاری واجپائی کا سواگت اپنے نئے جوہری بم سے کییا”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chagai-I). used to be printed and looked at heads with shame. Today India has improved its nuclear delivery capablities a lot. But then, China is always looming around like a shadow.

We say we have left behind Pakistan and are rather thinking about China. But our nuclear tests show something different. So who really is the target of the various nuclear tests ?

India is again playing its time-tested role of a major strategic stabilizer in the region and signaling that the Indian government is steadily increasing its willingness to take measures with the potential to contain Chinese expansion. First of all, this missile testing of Agni P disproves the Indian insistence that its new strategic concern is from China and its recent massive investment of resources in newer and advanced nuclear delivery mechanisms is aimed at China. That is not what the range of this missile tells us. The Agni-I Prime medium range ballistic missile tested on June 28 was announced to have a range between 1,000 – 2000 kms.

Looking at the dimensions of the missile and the size of the NOTAM issued, the missile is probably ranged between 1450-1650 kilometres. This is exactly the range envelope required to hit most Pakistani cities from most Indian ballistic missile regiments.

The range is simply too small to be used against the Chinese Eastern Seaboard, thus we can safely say that the prime target of the Agni-Prime is Pakistan. The pakistani journalists are even down to calling it the Agni-P wherein the P stands not for ‘Prime’ but instead for ‘Pakistan, which they perceive is India’s primary target.

The second important thing is the statemnt of the DRDO that the missile is “canisterized”. Now this is at least for me very interesting. For context, neither Pakistan nor India, in part due to bilateral Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) and responsible nuclear posture, deploy actual strategic weapons in the field. Ever since India became a declared nuclear weapons state, Indian warheads themselves are NOT mated to the ballistic missile, hence kept separate & mated only if required as per strategic threat level in vogue. Attached to this was the fact that the vast majority of both the country’s strategic weapons delivery systems were road-mobile missiles that are fired from Transporter Erector Launchers. Meaning before this missile was exposed to modification and thus during time of use the weapon can be attached to the missile as per if and when a rising strategic threat level presents itself.  
This is extremely important to the [no-first use of nukes](https://blog.forumias.com/answered-no-first-use-policy-of-india-is-based-upon-the-idea-of-minimum-deterrence-and-non-proliferation-of-nuclear-weapons-in-light-of-this-discuss-the-need-of-revisit-to-india/), which India signed in August 1999, but never done by Pakistan. India has now unilaterally changed this. In the Press Release the DRDO of India released today they explicitly mentioned and highlighted the fact that the Agni-P missile is fully cannisterized, meaning the missile is enclosed in a canister already mated with a warhead during the time of operationalisation of each missile system and ready for launch. Since the Agni-P is meant for the Indian Strategic Forces, India intends to deploy nuclear weapons in the field, with a live warhead ready to fire on a moment’s notice. Secondly, the canisterization of the solid fuel Agni-P missile means that India would be able to store the system remotely and launch it with little or no warning, eliminating the sort of support vehicles that would generate a large satellite signature to observe. In sum, the missile is specifically designed to increase survivability and even obtaining a second strike capability.

This is an extremely belligerent move made by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, doing the first steps in making India able to defend her borders at the shortest possible notice with an ever -ready can of missiles pointed right at Pakistan. India is also known to be working on other methods to decrease the time required for a missile launch and the satellite signature of its platforms as well, thus bringing back the strategic stability paradigm of not only South Asia, but Asia, back in Indian hands in general and globally as well. This better be the start of India’s millitarisation against the smallest of Chinese backyards.